---
layout: post
title:  "LeetCode 30-Day Challenge Part 1"
date:   2020-03-06 
categories: LeetCode
---
# LeetCode 30 Days of Coding Part 1
### LeetCode recently released a 30 day contest for completing coding challenges
While some of these challenges are just different iterations on common algorithms, I have found this particularly useful for testing out how I would solve these problems in different programming languages. For the most part these algorithms can be implemented in the same way across languages outside obvious language particular features. One of the cool things about this though is that sometimes you can gleam really interesting ways of tackling problems. I will be completing the entire 30 day challenge and use this series of blog posts to highlight some of the more interesting techniques. I will be completing the challenge in both python and c++. For python I am mostly looking at writing code in the most pythonic way I can. For c++ the focus will be on understanding the changes in speed and memory allocation across implementations. 

Despite being challenging I think the study of algorithms is one of the most beautiful areas of research in computer science. If you understand algorithms well, it allows you as a programmer to leverage the resources you have to better suit your problems. One of the hallmarks of modern NLP and deep learning  is the massive amount of data required for creating models. The large amount of data and the size of your models can drastically slow down performance, so optimization is integral for research and even more important for putting models into production. There is a growing body of research around creating smaller models and using less data to create better systems. I hope some of the skills I curate during this challenge will help me on my journey as I learn to apply NLP in some more niche areas like embedded systems. Either way I am enjoying myself. Cheers.

## Challenge 1: Single Number
### Bit Manipulation in C++
One of the more interesting solutions I have come across in the LeetCode Challenge has been uses for bit manipulation. The XOR operator in c++ operates on bits. The XOR operator compares two bit values and returns 1 if either values are 1 but 0 if both values are one. We will see how this can be leverage to find a unique number in an array of numbders

#### Challenge:
Given a **non-empty** array of integers, every element appears _twice_ except for one. Find that single one.

### Naive Solution
The naive solution to this problem is pretty straight forward. You first initialize an unordered map and then iterate over the list. For each element in the array if the map contains the number as a key its value is incremented. At the end of the initial for-loop you then iterate over the map and find the key that only has a value of 1. 
```
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>
using namespace std;

class NaiveSolution {
public:
    int singleNumber(vector<int>& nums) {
        int n = nums.size();
        unordered_map <int, int> count_map;
        for (int i = 0; i < n; i++)
            count_map[nums[i]]++;
        for (int i = 0; i < n; i++)
            if (count_map[nums[i]]==1)
                return nums[i];
                
        return 0;
    }
};
```
### XOR Bit Manipulation Solution 
```
class BitWiseSolution {
public:
    int singleNumber(vector<int>& nums) {
    int a = 0;
    for (int i : nums) {
        a ^= i;
    }
    return a;
  }
};
```
At first site one can see a few advantages in this solution. For one thing, no memory is allocated to create a map. Also, while both versions have O(n) runtime the XOR solution only uses a single loop. During the XOR operation each item in the list compared and the bit representation of **a** is changed accordingly. 

To understand what is going on let's look at a toy example with the list [1,2,10,2,10].
For each of the 5 iterations we will look at the value of 16-bit version of **a** :

| Array Index | **a** 16-Bit Value | **a** Integer Value | Array Value |
| ----- | ----- | ----- | -----|
| 0 | 0000000000000001 | 1 | 1 |
| 1 | 0000000000000011 | 3 | 2 |
| 2 | 0000000000001001 | 9 | 10|
| 3 | 0000000000001011 | 11 | 2|
| 4 | 0000000000000001 | 1 | 10|

It is interesting to note though that there are problems with both versions, specifically in the case of having multiple unique numbers. The naive solution will return the first value in the map that only appears once, while the bitwise solution will return the XOR equivalent of the individual numbers with all the duplicates removed. This is why it is important to go through test cases to fully understand the behavior of your code. The Naive solution will always return at least one unique number but the bitwise will return whatever integer results from XOR operation. 
